outer worlds don't really have a solid
surface and so you might ask well how
can we have any volcanoes out here Oh
in fact what we've got to remember is
that each of these is attended by a
large collection of moons Saturn I think
now has some 79 moons
so there are rather more objects out
there than just the four gas giants
here's a picture of the moon Io in a
most of the large moons of Jupiter
crossing across in front of the face of
the giant planet we look this Lee IO
this is a picture that one of the
Voyager spacecraft took then what we see
is this amazing colored landscape and it
looks like a pizza doesn't it but the
four colors that you see on the surface
here are in fact black white yellow and
an orange --red color and there are only
those four colors and if you remember
doing chemistry at school then you might
remember taking sulfur and heating it up
and then pouring it out onto the bench
or pouring it into water or letting it
cool more slowly and depending on how
fast or slower it cools you get four
different forms of sulfur for different
allotropes they're called and they are
white black yellow and orange the most
really being the yellow of course but
the others are just different forms of
it where the molecules grouped together
differently and it's all pure sulfur so
everything that you see on the surface
of Io there is sulfur but by oh wait
caught a volcano in action here it is
throwing material up backlit by the
light from the Sun so that the material
can be seen being ejected upwards out
into space and scattering all over the
surface of the little moon Io and it
turns out that every one of those black
Lotte's is the cold era of one of these
sulfur volcanoes on Io you can see it
down in for a couple of them here look I
can see that the top are not there with
it's very red and orange colors and lots
of very runny sulfur that's flowed out
of it and then down into the an active
one where as much more of the
high-temperature black sulfur formed
around what looks like a crater lake so
these are sulfur volcano is rather than
molten rock volcanoes showing something
about the composition and the chemistry
that's making up the little moon I out
another shot of a giant volcano called
Pele she's named after a Hawaiian God
rather than the footballer and that's
erupting out into space again you can
see the material up above the edge of
Ohio they're being ejected away out into
space and I think we've even got a
little movie of its light that's coming
through okay I'll just leave that
running for a moment but there is Pele
erupting material and it's blowing
downwind and spraying all over the
surface and you can see how that would
very quickly coat the surface of Io in
new material all the time and of course
it's that recoating that means that we
don't see any impact craters they're all
filled in by the ejecta from the very
very active volcanoes in fact if you
look really closely at this down and
about the where is it about the seven
o'clock position there is another active
volcano that's been caught just throwing
some material off out into space there
are along the limb and if you look along
the Terminator there's another one that
you can see moving the moving cloud at
about the 10 o'clock position on the
Terminator between the day and night
site there's another volcano going off
so there are at least three active
volcanoes caught in this image possibly
more
and IO is the most volcanic place that
we know about if we move outwards to the
second moon of Jupiter called Europa I
love this photograph what this shows is
the ice shiny white covering coating
most of the surface with these weird
cracks and grooves and patches of brown
material that sit over laying on top of
the the ice there and really the
question at the bottom the screen there
just what is that brown stuff is quite
intriguing what we think is going on is
that there is a thick ice covering maybe
tens of kilometers thick over laying a
warm salty ocean and there warm salty
oceans been detected by the
magnetometers on various spacecraft they
can tell as a electrically conducting
fluid beneath and also we think that
some of that fluid is working its way up
through the cracks and producing the ice
and water volcanoes obviously the water
turns to ice crystals the moment it hits
their near vacuum that surrounds Europa
and so they shower ice onto the surface
but it's bringing with it that brown
stuff which has got to be some sort of
organic chemical and looks just like the
same color as the scum on our village
pond it wouldn't surprise me at all if
we don't eventually sample it and
discover that it is the product of some
sort of life that's living in that briny
ocean we've even got photographs of that
process in action now there's one there
at the bottom left taken by a spacecraft
doing a flyby over the surface of Europa
and catching water plumes being ejected
along those cracks so we know that
they're active now and then we've got
some Hubble Space Telescope photographs
at the top right there showing in really
quite low resolution but showing the
bright white areas are where there are
some
RUP shion's that have been caught coming
off the surface of the little moon
estimates of the amount of water on
Europa quite incredible it's got more
water than the whole of the Earth's
oceans this diagram has kind of shown it
what would happen if you could gather
together all of the water on the earth
out of the oceans and make a droplet of
water sat there on top of the United
States do the same for Europa you get a
slightly larger droplets just a 50% or
so larger amount of water quite amazing
statistic really so
the curious thing is that both of these
moons Europa and IO about the same size
as the Earth's moon and they're probably
about the same age so the question is
why are they not dead and frozen why is
IO so volcanically active and what's
keeping those inner layers of Europa
warm enough for there to be liquid water
underneath the ice it has to do with
gravity it's the combined effect of a
tug of war between the three moons of
Jupiter that are shown here orbiting
around the planet not including the
outermost one Callisto Callisto seems to
be off sulking doing its own thing and
not playing the game but the others are
in an exact for to two to one orbital
ratio so every four laps that IO does
game eat does one and Europa does
exactly - you'll see Ganymede catch
Europa at the top then when it gets to
the top again there's no bone at home
the second time around
it catches Europa and if you follow your
OPA you'll see that does the same thing
with Ganymede it'll catch Ganymede at
the bottom this time around there it
goes and it goes around again and by the
time it gets to the bottom there's no
one at home and on the second lap for
Europa it catches up with Ganymede again
a tug of war it puts the moon's into
quite elliptical orbits which means that
the distance from Jupiter buries from a
fairly close approach to a more distant
approach as the each of the moons goes
around on its orbit
but gravity decreases with the distance
and so what happens is that the nearside
of any given moon is pulled more
strongly than the far side of that same
moon so it stretches them into a
slightly elliptical shape and that shape
is made more elliptical when they close
in on Jupiter at the near point of their
orbit and it relaxes back again as it
goes to the far point in its orbit
because it's further away from Jupiter
and that the effect of gravity
diminishes so they're constantly being
squit stretched and squished and like a
squash ball at the end of a game of
squash they get quite hot in the center
from the pummeling the same is happening
to IO it's being heated enormous ly by
all the friction of being stretched and
squished and turned into almost
completely molten and that's why it's so
violently volcanic it effects a bit less
for your rope a little bit further away
the power of Jupiter's gravity is not so
significant but it's enough to keep that
liquid water warm underneath the ice and
indeed Ganymede also gets a certain
amount of warming and probably also has
a nice layer beneath it we're not quite
so sure about that we have the
magnetometer data that says that it's
true but we've not caught any of that
water erupting well it does look from
pictures of the surface like it's a
young and uncrated surface so
something's happening there now Callisto
is in a different orbit it's not
synchronized with the other three and
when you look at it it's an old dead
world exactly as you would have expected
for a modest sized object around about
the same size as the planet Mercury and
so that's so the tidal heating is not
occurring on Callisto its mining its own
business and as cooled down over its
lifetime just as we would have expected
but the other three are definitely quite
a surprise
so if we leave Cooper and we go out
through the planet Saturn again we're
not going to look at Saturn we're not
going to look at its marvelous rings but
what we are going to do is look at some
of the worlds that are Saturn's moons
and in particular there's a couple of
photographs of the largest moon Titan
again about the same size as the planet
Mercury these guys would be called
planets if they orbited around the Sun
but they they don't they orbit their
host planet so we call the moons so the
left hand photograph is looking down
with an infrared camera from the Cassini
spacecraft and can just about see the
clouds in the Titan atmosphere there and
possibly through it to some of the
ground beneath so the use of infrared
that allows us to see through what is
otherwise quite a hazy atmosphere and so
when you look at it with a telescope
from the earth all you see is that haze
layer we talked in the other lecture
about some the atmospheres of some of
the inner planets and Titan has an
atmosphere it's about one and a half
times as dense as our own atmosphere
here on earth so it's really quite
earth-like and of course actually it
looks rather like the earth in that
photograph the image on the right though
is a volcano on Titan and this was
imaged with radar and it's an ice
volcano the surface of Titan is mostly
made of frozen water water ice and a lot
of the material making up the body of
the planet is probably ice ice a planet
world and so we have ice volcanoes again
the temperature here is minus 160
degrees centigrade so it's very cold and
that ice is taking the place of rock
it's quite rigid at those low
temperatures but the Huygens probe was
parachuted down through Titans
atmosphere it's just a couple of
photographs from it the big one on the
left is a bit of a fisheye view and we
have a
mountain ranges with fairly spiky
looking mountains to the left and just
to the right of Center and then we have
a couple of valleys between them and in
that main valley roughly in the middle
of the photograph there we can see what
looked like River is the classic sort of
tree like branching structures of rivers
running across what looks like a snowy
valley and then we can see other River
like structures further down the
photograph on the darker material now
the probe came down on its parachute and
when it landed it took the picture on
the right there and it landed on what
looks like a dried-up lakebed or perhaps
pebble covered riverbanks we're not
quite sure only had batteries for about
30 minutes and wasn't able to move to go
off and explore so probably be a nice
idea if we could send a space probe out
to Titan with some sort of rover and
explore a bit more the orbiter dick as
well it took some radar pictures down
through the atmosphere and this is the
Kraken moir
a lake on Titan and the lake is not full
of water the waters all frozen up hard
as rock and what we have here is liquid
methane ch4 the natural gas that we use
for cooking and heating flowing as water
as a liquid down the river channels that
you can see there has lots of rivers all
leading into this lake and then in the
middle inset area there we've got down
the left-hand strip photographs taken
over a number of years the first one in
2007 there and then it's changed quite
dramatically in 2013 2014 and 2015
well that's not the the land changing
that is the two level changing at a time
it's just come up to say I thought
given us an extension but we'll crack on
that's the level of the lake changing
with the seasons another moon here is
Enceladus this was a real surprise you
can see the cracks and the grooves in an
ice-covered surface again very much like
Europa right so Jupiter this one a very
small moon only 500 kilometers across
and there is a picture of the whole of
the surface some of it's got a few
craters on and it's therefore a little
bit older and less resurfaced than the
bit with the cracks the blue cracks they
called the tiger stripes why because
Tigers aren't blue I don't know but
again we've caught those tiger stripes
emitting water out in huge plumes so
that's telling us that there is another
icy ocean and again this could be a
candidate for life because they've flown
the probe through those plumes and
sampled it and it contains organic
material and hydrogen and as it could be
a fuel or food for a bacterial life
perhaps so we're going to leave Saturn
behind L the outer two planets and in
fact we're going to skip over the planet
Uranus and just moon of Neptune called
Triton which has these amazing terrain
taken by Voyager 2 we've got grooves
we've got cracks we've got a wrinkly
surface at the top that it's called the
cantaloupe terrain named after the melon
we've got what looks like pink snow that
turns out to be frozen nitrogen the
temperature here is minus 220 degrees
but those black bits those black things
are geezers they're all pointing in the
same direction if you look at them
they're all pointing diagonally up and
to the right and our geezers wear liquid
nitrogen is erupting from beneath the
surface carrying dirty material and so
this is a super cryo volcano
it's an eruption of what would be part
of our atmosphere here on earth nitrogen
but that's taking the place of the the
Luud of the volcanoes so that's an
artist's impression on the left but they
write down two images do in fact just
about show some plumes traveling
downwind in the thin tritonian
atmosphere and of course we mustn't
exclude Pluto climate or not it's a
dwarf planet according to the official
naming convention now and the New
Horizons probe produced some amazing
photographs here of a huge glacier
flowing across the surface and only a
few craters so this is a young active
surface on an old planet
it must be geologically active and
recycling itself here's a enhanced color
image showing the different chemicals
pick up ices on the surface of Pluto so
we've got a mixture of nitrogen methane
carbon monoxide and water all covering
the surface of Pluto and some of the ice
floes looking incredibly like the ice
floes of the Arctic here so we're
definitely seeing that glacier moving
across the surface and rubbing out the
impact craters as it goes and yes we've
detected volcanoes ice volcanoes in the
emitting material out and into the thin
Plutonian atmosphere so it's an active
little world and the question is why
these are by our dune Charon which also
shows quite a young surface but the two
are in complete lock they both keep the
same face pointing towards each other
and so we don't quite understand what
the source of that energy that's keeping
their interiors warm is all about still
a bit of a mystery here is a just a zoom
in on some of the surface features on
the moon Charon and because we're
running out of time
I will zip the earth and end with one
more slide here which is Hypno's
trench's down on the mid-atlantic ridge
that we talked about in part one we find
these black smokers where superheated
mineral-rich water is coming out from
underneath the ground bursting into the
cold water and dumping all of its
minerals and nutrients and living those
pink and white things those are tube
worms they live and feed along with
colonies of bacteria and all sorts of
strange creatures and they live and feed
entirely on the minerals and the energy
released in the chemicals from the
minerals coming out of the ground
they're not any part of the food chain
of the surface living creatures that all
depend on the Sun directly or indirectly
including humans of course and it's
quite possible that these were the
origin of life on Earth was at these
black smokers it involved here first and
then migrated up to the surface and I
would be prepared to take a bet that
eventually we'll discover that some of
these volcanic worlds that we see around
the solar system particularly things
like Ceres and Europa and Ganymede and
Enceladus and some of the other ice rich
and ash water ocean containing worlds
will have these black smokers down there
underneath in the protected environments
beneath their icy shells and I'd be
prepared to take another small bet that
there will be life having evolved around
them because it's got all the conditions
necessary and I really don't see why
that would not happen but of course as
Sir Patrick always used to say we just
don't know so we need to go and find out
you